# Visual_Word_Sense_Disambiguation

## Overview

This project addresses the task of Visual Word Sense Disambiguation (VWSD), which is central to multimodal artificial intelligence, bridging natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision. The goal is to accurately associate textual words or sentences with corresponding visual representations (images), thereby resolving ambiguity in textual descriptions.

## Approaches Implemented

Three state-of-the-art methodologies have been explored in this project:

### 1. CLIP-based Approach

This method uses the sentence-transformers library to convert multilingual textual inputs into embeddings. These embeddings are compared with visual embeddings generated by the CLIP-ViT-B-32 model. The best match is identified through cosine similarity.

### 2. WordNet + Lesk Algorithm Approach

English: Integrates the Lesk algorithm for word sense disambiguation, transformer-based text generation, and cosine similarity for matching textual descriptions with images. Achieved an accuracy of 0.64.

Multilingual (Italian and Farsi): Extends the above method by incorporating translation and context enrichment, facilitating effective semantic matching across languages. Demonstrated promising results with accuracy of 0.49 in Italian and 0.29 in Farsi.

### 3. Image Captioning Approach

English: Utilizes a captioning model to generate image descriptions, then computes sentence embeddings and matches them with textual contexts via cosine similarity.

Multilingual (Italian and Farsi): Applies translation models to evaluate cross-lingual captioning effectiveness, offering insights into the performance of captioning models across languages.

## Dataset and Savings
The dataset and savings employed in the experiments, are openly accessible through the following resources:

### Dataset
```bash
https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1KKbsHyVp7yfKSh9meXU3SZlPH_9BkGz5#scrollTo=eEG-73l8abXg](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1jqd0cgp5V3wV7Sf7XJjwvSRIFthVv1aM?usp=sharing)](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1jqd0cgp5V3wV7Sf7XJjwvSRIFthVv1aM?usp=drive_link)
```
### Savings
```bash
https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1KKbsHyVp7yfKSh9meXU3SZlPH_9BkGz5#scrollTo=eEG-73l8abXg](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1jqd0cgp5V3wV7Sf7XJjwvSRIFthVv1aM?usp=sharing)](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1rPSsRoxJ0eCBWCZb5jecyxQc8VrA6FWC?usp=drive_link)
```

### Results
| Approach | English    | Italian    | Farsi | Average Accuracy
| :---:   | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| CLIP | 0.58   | 0.19   | 0.07 | 0.28
| WordNet+Lesk | 0.64   | 0.49   | 0.29 | 0.48
| Image Captioning | 0.28   | 0.40   | 0.05 | 0.25
